The Joe Rogan experience.
Where was the situation that was happening during the Obama,
the Obama administration,
where they were trying to put a pipeline through and they were hosing people
down and right.
It was on private land and they were going through private land and people were
protesting it, but they were, they were forcing it through anyway, where was.
That? That was standing rock in, in, in North Dakota. And, um,
um, that's still going on today. In fact, I think this week,
is that a hearing that, well, it, the Fort Laramie treaty I think is,
is affected by that. So, um, uh,
there are some land right issues there, but we're,
we're talking about burials and sacred is, uh, not to mention, uh,
water quality, uh, and the tribes, um, Obama stopped it,
but as soon as Trump got into office, he, he, um, he,
he pushed it forward. Um, and,
and did not consult with tribes and it's been a fight ever since same thing
happened with, but Obama.
Was going through it and then they put,
they put a stop to it right before he left office. Right, right, right. I mean,
I watch, I just I'm so cynical. I wonder how much of that is horses.
How much of that is, well, what a stop to it? Eh, you know,
just let you know it's going through, don't worry boys.
Well, you know, the Obama administration was probably one of the more favorable
administrations to Indian country. Um, uh,
there were many presidents that had never even gone to a reservation,
like the majority of presidents and he did, uh, and he did actually,
he was adopted into the Croation, I think. Um, so he,
he's an adopted tribal member. That's.
Pretty cool. Do you think he's visit? It had since then? I.
Don't know, but that's, but, but that, that administration really did, uh,
a, a lot of work in Indian country that had never been done before.
And they actually, uh,
were looking to tribes and building a government to government relationship
that, uh, no one had ever really, uh, done as well. Uh,
every year they would,
he hold a big tribal consultation in DC where tribal leaders would come from
everywhere, um, and consult with, um,
Obama and his administration. Uh, it was, uh, uh,
really unprecedented. And, um, it was,
it was a really happy time. And as soon as Trump got into office, uh,
the doors closed, the doors closed. So even though, um,
he appointed, um, uh, assistant secretary for Indian affairs,
a Tara Sweeney, who's Alaska native, um, that, uh,
administration in the department of interior and, uh, uh,
under the president has just been so closed.
It's been hard to get anything done or to get heard,
or even actually have that government to government relationship anymore. Um,
uh, we've been left out of a lot of the decision making process that's going on,
uh, all over Indian country.
Uh, well, that's a, it's a very good thing to hear about Obama that he did that.
It's sad to hear that the Trump administration has abandoned that, but mm-hmm,
<affirmative>, it's nice to hear that someone was making an attempt to do that.
Um, so what I'm getting is that there really is no,
no long term solution. There's no solution. You're saying that the,
I think there's a lot of.
Solutions with, I think there's a lot of solutions and a lot of moving parts.
And I think, I think, you know, um, uh,
Indian nations need to determine for themselves how best to handle the problems
within their communities, but outward facing, um,
to have a strong government to government relationship that takes
into account not just takes into account, but actually, um,
requires the, um,
prior and consent of those tribal nations before affecting their
rights or, um, uh,
or at least some diplomacy or negotiation, uh,
with varying interest before decisions are made. I, I think that's,
that's the heart of, of, of what needs to happen outward facing.
And also we need to take a look at, at our curriculum in schools.
We really need to, um, most of our CU all of our curriculum in,
in public schools is about looking at native American pre pre 1900.
So, um, uh,
and not caring that into today and who contemporary native
American tribe are and what they're doing to help their people. And,
and what's so wonderful about, um,
Indian country today is that, uh, though there have,
there are some places that are still,
there are some anti-Indian hate groups out there that fight tooth and
nail against anything, a tribe in their area tries to do to, um,
uh, develop economically. There are other communities where, um,
tribes have been able to, uh, bring in economic development,
whether that's through gaming or otherwise. And by the way, um,
Indian gaming is like no other type of corporate gaming.
And I think a lot of people don't understand this.
So if you're a gambler go to Indian casinos,
cuz that money goes towards Indian nation governance.
It's not like a private business. It is, um,
legislated that, that money, uh,
from those casinos go back into Indian nation governance
and are used for jobs and employment and social services
and all of that relieves the state and other government agencies from,
from having that, um, that responsibility. So are those.
The success stories of modern, those.
Are the success stories. I mean, if you look at so Oklahoma, uh,
the state of Oklahoma is fighting, um, Indian nations in,
in Oklahoma, um, about gaming,
trying to get more money outta gaming, but the,
that Oklahoma tribes have brought in, um,
uh, tons of money, a hundred thousand, uh, jobs have been created,
um, in, in casino and other economic development. Um.
So who's fighting it.
And why, um, the governor is fighting it, governor, governor did,
I think is his name. And, uh,
he's trying to rego renegotiate gaming compacts in
order to bring more money into the state.
So essentially trying to tax, um, that, uh,
for state purposes.
Even though it's on native land. Right.
Right.
Interesting. So it's almost in,
in a way another attempt at violating a treaty. Absolutely.
So denying the sovereign nation, right.
Well, in the Indian gaming regulatory act, which was passed,
there's so much federal legislation, it's insane of federal Indian law. I mean,
it has its own 25 USC, this huge code of, of,
of stuff, man. Uh, but the Indian gaming regulatory act,
uh, was passed because Indians were finding success,
doing gaming in states were getting off, um,
because they were doing it without any interference,
which is their inherent sovereignty to do so. That's hilarious.
So this, so this, this act came, which was kind of a compromise where,
where tribes can do, what's called class two gaming,
which is based on bingo and, and there's electronic bingo games, um,
that are kind of like slot machines. Um,
so tribes can do class two gaming without any parents with state,
but if they do class three gaming that's card games and other types, um,
then the state, um, uh,
they have to work with the state in order to develop some kind of compact and,
and revenue sharing, uh, for class three gaming. So the state,
the federal government, again,
allowed state to interfere with that inherent tribal, uh,
sovereignty to regulate their own economic development.
Yeah. That's an issue with all, uh, of these native American casinos, isn't it,
they don't get the full Vegas treatment.
They can't have all the games that Vegas can have.
Uh, they can, that's the class three gaming, but.
They have to do it through the state. Right.
So versus through their sovereign government, mm-hmm, <affirmative>,
it's so strange, right.
It's like for in under one hand they get no help at all.
And then when something comes along that allows them to economically thrive.
Then the government's like, hold on, where's our.
Piece. So why do you think this is so, um, so much because they can,
and, and so much legislation looks at tribes as if they're inferior.
Yes. So back again to those watershed cases of, of justice Marshall. Yeah. Um.
They're inferior, um, even, uh, uh,
being able to assert D over non-Indians who come into
our territory and do something wrong. Um, we can't right.
Can't so if someone breaks the law in a, in a native American reservation,
mm-hmm, <affirmative>,
they're under the federal government's guidelines or the state government's
laws.
Uh, uh, the tribe does not have criminal ju over non Indians within.
So.
If someone comes in and robs a casino, mm-hmm <affirmative>,
then the state has to take.
Care of it. Right. State or the federal government,
depending on what type of crime.
Ideally, would it be that the native Americans would take care of it?
Yeah. Why not?